[CIE-5419] CDH migration from appliance to k8s edge (#3853)
SoftwareAG/c8y-docs: content/edge-kubernetes/manage-edge-bundle/migrating-edge-appliance.md

Reviewer: In step #2, the belwo note is not relevant any more. We can remove it.

> {{< c8y-admon-caution >}}
> This step only creates a backup of {{< product-c8y-iot >}} DataHub (datalake) contents. Migration of {{< product-c8y-iot >}} DataHub is outside the scope of this document and must be handled separately (no scripts are currently provided).
> {{< /c8y-admon-caution >}}

4. Tar the MongoDB data and data lake contents from {{< product-c8y-iot >}} DataHub if present, into */opt/edge-appliance-backup.tar* :

>    1. Migrate HSQL db.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   1. Migrate the HSQL DB.
```

      ```shell
      pip install https://download.cumulocity.com/Cumulocity-Edge/Installer/2025/cdh_migration-2025-py3-none-any.whl \
      && cdh-migration
      ```

>       wait until you see an out put `INFO - Data export complete: database_export.sql`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      wait until you see an output `INFO - Data export complete: database_export.sql`
```

   ```shell
   rm -rf /opt/appliance-edgedb-backup /opt/edge-appliance-backup.tar
   ```
### Step 5 - Restore DataHub

> 1. Stop Edge operator:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Stop the Edge operator:
```

   ```shell
   kubectl scale deployment c8yedge-operator-controller-manager -n c8yedge --replicas=0
   ```

> 2. Set tenant option `CDH_PASSWORD_SECRET` on edge tenant:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Set the tenant option `CDH_PASSWORD_SECRET` on the Edge tenant:
```

>    1. Get the secret from backup:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   1. Get the secret from the backup:
```

      ```shell
      grep CDH_PASSWORD_SECRET /opt/softwareag/cdh-console/conf/cdh-console-env
      ```

>    2. Set tenant option on edge:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   2. Set the tenant option on Edge:
```

      ```shell
      curl --location 'https://<EDGE_HOST_IP>/tenant/options/' \
      -H 'Content-Type: application/vnd.com.nsn.cumulocity.option+json' \
      -H 'Accept: application/vnd.com.nsn.cumulocity.option+json' \
      -u "management/${MANAGEMENT_ADMIN_USER}:${MANAGEMENT_ADMIN_PASSWORD}" \
      --data '{
         "category": "datahub",
         "key": "credentials.CDH_PASSWORD_SECRET",
         "value": "<PASSWORD_SECRET_FROM_PREVIOUS_STEP>"
      }'
      ```

> 3. Migrate dremio:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Migrate Dremio:
```

>    1. Redeploy dremio in maintanace mode for migration, fetch dremio helm chart from installartifacts:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   1. Redeploy Dremio in maintenance mode for migration and fetch the Dremio Helm chart from the installation artifacts:
```

      ```shell
       kubectl get pv -A -o yaml | grep -A1 installartifacts-backing | awk '/path:/ {print $2}'
      ```

>    2. Backup values.yaml:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   2. Backup *values.yaml*:
```

      ```shell
      helm get values dremio -n c8yedge --all -o yaml > dremio_values.yaml
      ```

>    3. Set dremio to maintanance:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   3. Set Dremio to maintenance mode:
```

      ```shell
      helm upgrade dremio ./dremio-11.0.648.tgz   -n c8yedge   -f dremio_values.yaml   --set DremioAdmin=true   --wait
      ```

>    4. Restore RocksDB from backup:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   4. Restore RocksDB from the backup:
```

      ```shell
      kubectl exec -n c8yedge dremio-admin -- rm -rf /opt/dremio/data/db && kubectl cp /opt/mongodb/cdh-master/data/db dremio-admin:/opt/dremio/data/ -n c8yedge
      ```

>    5. Restore datalake contents:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   5. Restore the datalake contents:
```

      ```shell
      rm -rf /datahub/distributedStorage/* /datahub/datalake/* && cp -a /opt/mongodb/cdh-dremio/distributed-storage/. /datahub/distributedStorage/ && cp -a /opt/mongodb/cdh-master/datalake/. /datahub/datalake/
      ```
   6. Exit from maintaince mode:
      ```shell
      helm upgrade dremio ./dremio-11.0.648.tgz   -n c8yedge   -f dremio_values.yaml   --set DremioAdmin=false   --wait
      ```

4. Restore DataHub:
   ```shell
   kubectl cp /home/admin/database_export.sql -n c8yedge datahub-mysql-0:/tmp/database_export.sql && \
   kubectl exec -i -n c8yedge datahub-mysql-0 -- sh -c 'mysql -u root -p"$MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD" CDH_edge < /tmp/database_export.sql'
   ```

> 5. Configure dremio:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Configure Dremio:
```

>    Post migration, dremio will have legacy configuration of c8y_source from appliance, this needs to be updated for dremio to communicate with mongo. In this step we will update the `c8y_source` configuration:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   After the migration, Dremio will have a legacy configuration of `c8y_source` from the appliance. This needs to be updated for Dremio to communicate with Mongo. In this step, we will update the `c8y_source` configuration:
```

>       1. Set support property “store.plugin.keep_metadata_on_replace“ = true in Dremio (goto Settings > Support)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      1. Set the support property `store.plugin.keep_metadata_on_replace` to `true` in Dremio (go to Settings > Support).
```

>       2. Configure settings of “c8y-source” as required for edge on K8s:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      2. Configure the settings of `c8y-source` as required for Edge on Kubernetes:
```

>          a. Configure MongoDB host name and credentials 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
         - Configure the MongoDB host name and credentials.
```

>       3. Set support property “store.plugin.keep_metadata_on_replace“ = false in Dremio

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      3. Set the support property `store.plugin.keep_metadata_on_replace`to `false` in Dremio.
```

   ```shell
   curl -sfL {{< link-c8y-doc-baseurl >}}files/edge-k8s/dremio_source_configuration.sh -O && bash ./dremio_source_configuration.sh
   ```

> 6. Start Edge operator:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. Start the Edge operator:
```

2. Set tenant option `CDH_PASSWORD_SECRET` on edge tenant:
   1. Get the secret from backup:
      ```shell
      grep CDH_PASSWORD_SECRET /opt/softwareag/cdh-console/conf/cdh-console-env
      ```
   2. Set tenant option on edge:
      ```shell
      curl --location 'https://<EDGE_HOST_IP>/tenant/options/' \
      -H 'Content-Type: application/vnd.com.nsn.cumulocity.option+json' \
      -H 'Accept: application/vnd.com.nsn.cumulocity.option+json' \
      -u "management/${MANAGEMENT_ADMIN_USER}:${MANAGEMENT_ADMIN_PASSWORD}" \
      --data '{
         "category": "datahub",
         "key": "credentials.CDH_PASSWORD_SECRET",
         "value": "<PASSWORD_SECRET_FROM_PREVIOUS_STEP>"
      }'
      ```

3. Migrate dremio:
   1. Redeploy dremio in maintanace mode for migration, fetch dremio helm chart from installartifacts:
      ```shell
      cp "$(kubectl get pv -A -o yaml | grep -A1 installartifacts-backing | awk '/path:/ {print $2}')/helmchart/edge/dependencies/helm-charts/cdh/dremio-11.0.648.tgz" .
      ```
   2. Backup values.yaml:
      ```shell
      helm get values dremio -n c8yedge --all -o yaml > dremio_values.yaml
      ```
   3. Set dremio to maintanance:
      ```shell

>       helm upgrade dremio ./dremio-11.0.648.tgz   -n c8yedge   -f dremio_values.yaml   --set DremioAdmin=true   --wait

Reviewer: If you are just changing the DremioAdmin=true, you don't need to download the existing values and pass them back.

Author: I remember this discussion, just mentioned the step to keep it the same as Dremio official document suggested. https://www.dremio.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/12/Migrate-a-Dremio-Standalone-Cluster-to-Kubernetes-1.pdf

Also I vaguely remember having faced some issues with deployment when I made changes without passing value.yaml, I will test it again and, will update the doc @bbyreddy
